= RUBY NIFTI

Ruby NIFTI is a pure-ruby library for handling NIfTI data in Ruby. NIfTI
[(Neuroimaging Informatics Technology Initiative)](http://nifti.nimh.nih.gov/)
is an image format designed primarily for storing and analyzing MRI & PET
imaging data.

Ruby NIfTI currently only supports reading NIfTI files, including basic and
extended header information. It doesn't attempt to touch the image data
(rotate it, etc.) and is still very much in its infancy. Nonetheless it does
provide a nice interface to get at NIfTI info from within ruby. Since Ruby
isn't as widely known as a quantitative scripting language yet (Python is more
well known, and PyNifti is more mature than NumericalRuby / NArray) I don't
know how widely this will be used, but hopefully it will be useful for
somebody.

== INSTALLATION

  gem install nifti


== BASIC USAGE

  require "nifti"
  # Read file:
  obj = Nifti::NObject.new("some_file.nii")
  # Display some key information about the file:
  obj.header
  # Retrieve the pixel data in a Ruby Array:
  image = obj.get_image
  # Load the pixel data to an NArray image object and display it on the screen:
  image = obj.get_image_narray

== LIMITATIONS

There are plenty of Nifti libraries around (the canonical
[nifticlib](http://niftilib.sourceforge.net/), which includes c, python and
matlab interfaces, and matlab interfaces in the Mathworks image processing
toolbox and [Toolbox for
Nifti](http://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/8797-tools-for-nifti-and-analyze-image)
by Jimmy Shen. 

This library is not intending to replace them, but rather to provide a few
pure ruby convenience methods for quickly getting into imaging data from ruby
without having to call out to external programs. At current, it doesn't do
much more than byte parsing and providing access to the header. However,
[narray](http://narray.rubyforge.org/) is picking up and its possible that
people would want to have some convenience methods if they have existing ruby
programs.

== CREDIT

Ruby NIfTI is highly derivative of the wonderful library [Ruby
DICOM](http://dicom.rubyforge.org/), from which all of the design and most of
the code has been cold-heartedly stolen. Many thanks to Chris Lervag - this
wouldn't exist without his examples.

== RESOURCES

* {Official home page}[http://dicom.rubyforge.org/]
* {Discussion forum}[http://groups.google.com/group/ruby-dicom]
* {Source code repository}[https://github.com/dicom/ruby-dicom]


== COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2011 Erik Kastman

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see http://www.gnu.org/licenses/ .


== ABOUT ME

* Name: Erik Kastman
* Location: Madison, Wisconsin, USA
* Email: ekk [@nospam.com] @medicine.wisc.edu

Please don't hesitate to email me if you have any thoughts about this project!